Some of the programs
you'll use on
the mainframe are also
known as Utilities.
Utilities perform a specific task
and can be called through
JCL to do things like copy
data sets and members,
sort records, generate data.
In this section, we'll take
a look at just a few of
the more commonly
used z/OS Utilities.
We'll start with
System Utilities.
Here, you'll find ICKDSF
which is used to Install,
Initialize and Manage dustbin.
There's also IEHINITT
with two T's at the end.
That's used to initialize
tapes for long-term storage,
and there's IEHLIST which is
a utility used to list
entries in a PDS to look at
it does this volume
Table of Contents or
v-tech or to view an operating
system volumes Catalog.
You'll notice that
with these there's
a sort of a format going on.
There's a prefix, followed
by an abbreviated,
representation of what it does.
Well the prefixes correspond
with the z/OS component
that they work in.
For example, ICK is Device
Support Facilities,
IEH is Data Facility Product,
DFP and IEF is Allocation,
IPL Jazz Scheduler,
and well it's actually a
number of core components.
Then there's data
set utilities which
typically start with IEB.
You may be wondering why we're
spending so much time on
data sets and why there are
so many data set utilities.
Well the simple fact is that
the mainframe deals in data,
it's constantly creating records
based on what
applications are doing,
and those applications
are updating records.
There's always
going to be need to
take information
created in one place
and re-purpose it to be used as
input for a programmer
made into a report.
More importantly, it means
you can handle those types of
situations quickly,
instead of editing
records individually,
line by line by hand because you
needed to remove the fifth
column of each record.
Another word about
utility is a lot of times
the utility is multipurpose
like a Swiss Army knife.
So if you uses one
set of parameters,
it'll create a data-set but
use it with another set of
parameters and it
generates Debug Data,
and the only way to really
know what a utility is
capable of is to look
at the documentation.
Also point out that
you can often use
different utilities
to do the same thing.
They might do them
slightly differently
but there's more than one
way to copy a data set.
So let's look at that.
IEBCOPY as you might
guess it's there for
copying but it can also do
merges of PDS's and PDSE's.
It can do a compression
of PDS's and PDSE's,
and it can even convert PDS's
into PDSE's and vice versa.
Here's what invoking
It looks like.
We're using it here to copy
one PDS into another PDS.
There's no input needed just
specifying the two data-set
straight down here.
Quick quiz on IEBCOPY and
it's a true or false.
I can use IEBCOPY to
merge v-Sam data sets.
The answer to that is,
"false," it's for PDS's and
PDSE's only when we want to work
in v-Sam data sets we need to use
another utility which we'll
take a look at later.
Here's IEBGENER
which does not mean
that it's utility for people
brand new to the mainframe.
The name is I-E-B the
prefix for data set
utility and then G-E-N-E-R
for Generate Records,
and it can be used to
backup a data set,
produce a partition data set
from members of
sequential data set,
print out the contents
of data sets,
and even convert data formats
and change settings
for a data set.
Very nice to know about
all those capabilities.
Here it is getting
called through JCL.
We're copying one
data set to another,
and you can see we're
also specifying
a few parameters about
how we want that new
data set to be created.
DFSORT is a high-performance
Sort Merge Copy
Analysis and Reporting
Product for z/OS
and it can handle
data at the record
field and bit-level.
This is one of the
biggest Swiss army knives
out there because it can sort,
merge, and copy but
while it's doing
that it can also reformat
data along the way.
So you can use it to
change date formats,
edit, delete, and add
fields, repeat records.
You can even use it to
perform arithmetic on data
summing up values in records
while you're sorting
or merging them.
It's important to know about
all the capabilities
of these utilities
because you will be in a
situation where you're
presented with a set of
data that looks one way,
and it needs to be formatted in
a different way for a
program that take it.
When you're able to say
I finally got to use
that function of
DFSORT or IEBCOPY,
and it works it's
a great feeling.
So before writing
your own code to
do something and starting
from scratch check
the utilities because chances
are someone else had to do
it before and maybe there's a
utility for it you can use.
Lastly, I want to show you
a special program IEFBR14.
This is an IEF.
So it has to do with allocation,
and I can tell you
that BR14 means Branch
to Register 14 which is
an assembler instruction.
All you really need
to know is that
IEFBR14 is a program
designed to do nothing.
So you remember how in
JCL you can specify
new Catalog delete for
a data set and it will
allocate a new member,
and it will catalog that member
if the job ran correctly?
Well, what if all we want to
do is create a new data set.
That method in JCO is
a pretty handy way of
doing it and it's a shame.
We have to do it while calling
a program because I'm really
not interested in what running
that program is
actually going to do.
That's where IEFBR14 comes in.
It let's use those JCL features
while executing a program,
and that program is
actually just there
because you have to specify
a program it does nothing.
So in this example we're
creating a new data set with
new Catalog and
we're not specifying
the third parameter because
we just know it's going to work,
and then we're also
using this DD statement
to delete an existing data set.
It's kind of a hack but
it's an official hack,
and people use it
all over the place.
Actually, know a guy who has
IEFBR14 as their
custom license plate.
Last one, IDCAMS this one
is for generating and
modifying v-Sam as well
as non v-Sam data sets,
and I feel like I
keep saying this
but you become an
expert in IDCAMS,
and he get that across to
an employer that's time
well spent right there.
Speaking of time well spent
that brings us to the
end of this lesson.